Project characteristics – 1. An established objective, 2. A defined life span with a beginning and an end, 3. Usually, the involvement of several departments and professionals, 4. Typically, doing something that has never been done before, 5. Specific time, cost and performance requirements
Project life cycle – 1. Defining stage – objects established, teams are formed, responsibilities are assigned. 2. Planning stage – what project will entail, when it will be scheduled, whom it will benefit, what quality level should be maintained, and what the budget will be. 3. - Executing stage – most work takes place. Time, cost, measures. 4- Delivering stage: Two activities : delivering the project product to the customer and redeploying project resources.
Importance of project management – 1. Compression of the product life cycle, 2. Global Competition, 3. Knowledge explosion, 4. Corporate Downsizing, 5. Increased customer focus, 6. Small projects represent Big problems.
Four Activities of the strategic Management projcess -  1. Review and define the Organizational mission. 2. Set long-range goals and objectives. 3. Analyze and formulate strategies to reach objectives. 4. Implement strategies through projects.
Need for an effective project portfolio management system – 1. The implementation gap. 2. Organization politics. 3. Resource conflicts and multitasking
Classification of the Project -  1. Selection Criteria, 2. Financial Models
Nonfinancial Criteria – 1. Two multi-criteria selection models. 2. Checklist models. 3. Multi-Weighted scoring models.
Project scope checklist – 1. Project objective – Define overall objective of customer's need. 2. Deliverable s – Expected output over the life of the project. 3. Milestones – Schedule shows only major segments of work; it represents first, rough cut estimates of time, costs, and resources. 4. Technical requirements – Ensure proper performance. 5. Limits and exclusions – Limits of scope should be defined. 6. Review with customer - 
Establishing project priorities – 1.Constrain – Fixed, must be completed with specs. 2. Enhance – Can be optimized in case of time and cost. What can reduce costs or shorten schedule meaning adding value to project. 3. Accept – What is it not to beet the original parameters?
WBS (Work Breakdown Structure) – 1. Defines work(what) 2. Identifies time to complete a work package (how long). 3. Identifies a time-phased budget to complete a work package (cost). 4.Identifies resources needed to complete a work package (how much). 5.Identifies a single person responsible for units of work (who). 6. Identifies monitoring points for measuring progress (how well).
Project communication plans – 1. Stakeholder analysis – Identify the target groups. 2. Information needs – what information is stakeholders to contribute to project's progress. 3. Sources of information – what information needs are identified, the next step is to determine the sources of information. 4. Dissemination modes – methods of information travel. 5. Responsibility and timing – Determine who will send out the information.
Factors influencing the quality of estimates – 1. Planning Horizon – estimates of current events. 2. Project Duration – New technology has a habit of increasing costs. Poorly written scope specs for new tech can result in errors. Long duration costs are of uncertainty. 3. People – People factor introduce errors in time and costs. 4. Project structure and organization – Which project structure is chosen to manage the project will influence time and cost estimates.  5. Padding estimates – People pad estimates. 6. Organization culture -based on the time of organization culture. 7. Other factors – nonproject factors can impact time and costs estimates. ( holidays, equipment down, resources)
Estimating Guidelines for Times, Costs, and resources – 1. Responsibility – Estimates should be made by people familiar with task (experience). 2. Use several people to estimate- Has a better chance to be more reasonable and realistic. 3. Normal conditions – Estimates should be based on normal conditions.  4. Time units – All task time estimates need consistent time units. 5. independence – Each task treated as independent. 6. Contingencies – Work package estimates should not include allowances for contingencies. 7. Adding risk assessment to estimate helps to avoid surprises to stakeholders.
Top-Down versus Bottom-up Estimating- Top-down estimates – Strategic decision making, high uncertainty, Internal small projects, unstable scope. Bottom-up estimates – Cost and time important, fixed-price contract, customer wants detailed.
Methods fo restimating project times and costs.  Top-down approaches for estimating – 1. Consensus method – uses high/middle experience manager to estimate. 2. Ratio Method – Using ratios, to estimate. 3. Apportion method – extension to ratio. Follows closely to past projects in features and costs. 4. Function point methods for software and system projects – based on inputs, outputs, inquiries, date files, and interfaces. 5. Learning Curves – Some tasks be repeated. By repeating improvement will be seen and can predict a reduction in time to perform. Bottom-up approach -  1. Template methods – if close to a past project may use as a starting point. With new things can adjust from the past. 2. Parametric Procedures applied to specific tasks – just as parametric techniques can estimate cost per square foot. 3. Detailed Estimates for the WBS work packages – Most reliable mehtod is to have people responsible of the work packages to make estimates. 
A hybrid: pahse estimating -Begins as a top-down estimate and then refines estimates for phases of the project as it is implemented.
Types of costs – 1. Direct costs – Labor, Materials, Equipment, other. 2. Project overhead costs. 3. General and administrative (G&A) overhead costs.
1. Costs are clearly chargeable to a specific work package.
2. Pinpoint which resources of the organization are being used in the project. Tied to project deliverable s or work packages.
3. Costs not linked to a specific project. Costs from duration fo project, examples include advertising, accounting, and senior management above project level.
Terminology – 1. Activity – An element of the project that requires time. May or may not include resources. 2. Merge activity – This is an activity that has more than one activity immediately preceding it. 3. Parallel activities – Activities that can take place anytime. 4. Path – A sequence of connected, dependent activities. 5. Critical Path. When this term is used, the longest duration through the network. 6. Event – This term is used to represent a point in time when an activity is started or completed. Does not consume time. 7. Burst activity – Has more than one activity immediately following it.
Two Approaches – AON – Activity – on – node,  AOA Activity- on-Arrow. 
Forward Pass- Earliest Time – 1. How soon can activity start – ES, 2. How soon can the activity finish – EF, 3. How soon can the project be finished – TE.
Backward Pass – Latest Times  - 1. How late can the activity start? LS. 2. How late can the activity finish? LF. 3. Which activities are the critical path (CP)? 4. How long can be delayed (Slack – SL)
Steps to risk identification – Step 1 – Risk identification – Analyze the project. Step 2 – Risk Assessment – Assess in terms – Severity of impact, likelihood, control liability. Step 3- Risk Response Development – Develop strategy to reduce damage, contingency plans .Step 4- Risk response control – Implement risk strategy, monitor and adjust, change management.
Risks – avoiding, transferring, sharing, retaining. Avoiding – Changing plan to eliminate risk. Transferring – passing to another party does not change risk. Sharing – sharing risks with different parties. Retain – Some risks are too large must be accepted.
Contingency plan – Planned in case some situation future risk may happen.
Technical risks – are problematic, cause projects to shut down. Schedule risks – Wait til it surfaces to deal with. Costs Risks – Contingency for future price changes. Funding risks – If funding is cut etc. 
Contingency funding – Budget reserves – determine for later risks to cover costs for specific risk. Management reserves – unforeseen risks. Time buffers – abosrb unplanned costs.
Risk Response – Change control management – Scope changes, Implementation of contingency plans, Improvement changes.
Change in control systems to accomplish – 1. Identify proposed changes, 2. List expected effects of proposed changes on schedule and budget. 3. Review, evaluate, and approve or disapprove changes formally. 4. Negotiate and resolve conflicts of change, conditions, and costs. 5. Communicate changes to parties affected. 6. Assign responsibility 7. Adjust master schedule and budget. 8. Track all changes that are to be implemented.
Benefits change control systems – 1. Inconsequential changes are discourage by the formal process. 2. Costs of changes are maintained in a log. 3. Integrity of the WBS and performance measures is maintained. 4. Allocation and use of budget and management reserve funds are tracked. 5. Responsibility for implementation is clarified. 6Effect of changes is visible to all parties involved. 7. Implementation of change is monitored. 8. Scope changes will be quickly reflected in baseline and performance measures.
Types of resource constrainsts – 1. People, 2. Materials, 3. Equipment.
Scheduling problems – Time-constrained, Resource-constrained
Resource allocation methods – Assumptions, Time-constrained Projects: smoothing resource demand. - The peak of demand for the resource was reduced, resources over the life of the project have been reduced, the fluctuations in resource demand were minimized. 
Resource-constrained projects – minimum slack, smallest duration, lowest activity identification number.
Impacts of resource- constrained scheduling – reduces slack, reduces flexibility by using slack to ensure delay to minimize and increases the number of critical and near-critical activities.
Multiporject Resource Schedules – 1. Overall schedule slippage, 2. Inefficient resource utilization, 3. Resource bottlenecks.
Time-phased budget baseline - 
Project control process – 1. Setting a baseline plan, 2. Measuring progress and performance, 3. Comparing plan against actual, 4. Taking action
